Spatiotemporal brain hierarchies of auditory memory recognition and predictive coding

Matlab leading script for the paper entitled: "Spatiotemporal brain hierarchies of auditory memory recognition and predictive coding" BiorXiv (2023).
L. Bonetti, G. Fernández Rubio, F. Carlomagno, M.J. Dietz, D. Pantazis, P. Vuust, M.L. Kringelbach.

https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.11.19.517195v4

Additional relevant codes and functions are available here: https://github.com/leonardob92/LBPD-1.0.git

Abstract: Our brain is constantly extracting, predicting, and recognising key spatiotemporal features of the physical world in order to survive. While neural processing of visuospatial patterns has been extensively studied, the hierarchical brain mechanisms underlying conscious recognition of auditory sequences and the associated prediction errors remain elusive. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), we studied the brain functioning of 83 participants during recognition of previously memorised musical sequences and systematic variations. The results showed feedforward connections originating from auditory cortices, and extending to the hippocampus, anterior cingulate gyrus, and medial cingulate gyrus. Simultaneously, we observed backward connections operating in the opposite direction. Throughout the sequences, the hippocampus and cingulate gyrus maintained the same hierarchical level, except for the final tone, where the cingulate gyrus assumed the top position within the hierarchy. The evoked responses of memorised melodies and variations engaged the same hierarchical brain network but systematically differed in terms of temporal dynamics, strength, and polarity. Furthermore, induced-response analysis showed that alpha and beta power was stronger for the variations, while gamma power was enhanced for the memorised sequences. This study expands on the predictive coding theory by providing quantitative evidence of hierarchical brain mechanisms during conscious memory and predictive processing of auditory sequences.
